build/README.md, before:

# Module `render`

Script to render the Polars landing page(s). Limited fanciness included.

**Functions:**

* [`render_all_posts()`](#renderrender_all_posts): Render each post using the associated template.
* [`render_post_list()`](#renderrender_post_list): Render the list of posts using the associated template.
* [`render_game_page()`](#renderrender_game_page): Render the little stupid game using the associated template.
* [`render_home_page()`](#renderrender_home_page): Render the landing page using the associated template.

## Functions

### `render.render_all_posts`

```python
render_all_posts(path: str, tmpl_name: str):
```

Render each post using the associated template.

Each Markdown file will be converted to HTML; named identically, different
extension. On the way fills in the `meta` object describing the post.

**Parameters:**

* `path` [`str`]: Root folder to [recursively] fetch the files to process from. Defaults to `.`.
* `tmpl_name` [`str`]: Name of the template to use. Defaults to `post.html`.

**Notes:**

This is a stateful function!

### `render.render_post_list`

```python
render_post_list(path: str, tmpl_name: str):
```

Render the list of posts using the associated template.

**Parameters:**

* `path` [`str`]: Target path the list will be rendered and outputted to. Defaults to
    `posts/index.html`.
* `tmpl_name` [`str`]: Name of the template to use. Defaults to `post.html`.

**Notes:**

This is a stateful function!

### `render.render_game_page`

```python
render_game_page(path: str, tmpl_name: str):
```

Render the little stupid game using the associated template.

**Parameters:**

* `path` [`str`]: Target path the game page will be rendered and outputted to. Defaults to
    `game.html`.
* `tmpl_name` [`str`]: Name of the template to use. Defaults to `game.html`.

**Notes:**

This is a stateful function!

### `render.render_home_page`

```python
render_home_page(path: str, tmpl_name: str):
```

Render the landing page using the associated template.

**Parameters:**

* `path` [`str`]: Target path the landing page will be rendered and outputted to. Defaults to
    `index.html`.
* `tmpl_name` [`str`]: Name of the template to use. Defaults to `home.html`.

**Notes:**

This is a stateful function!

Commit message:

Title as endpoint (#38)
* Made titles part of the endpoints
* Added support for thumbnail image
* Cleaned up rendering code

build/README.md, after:

# Module `render`

Script to render the Polars landing page(s). Limited fanciness included.

**Functions:**

* [`render_all_posts()`](#renderrender_all_posts): Render each post using the associated template.
* [`render_post_list()`](#renderrender_post_list): Render the list of posts using the associated template.
* [`render_game_page()`](#renderrender_game_page): Render the little stupid game using the associated template.
* [`render_home_page()`](#renderrender_home_page): Render the landing page using the associated template.

## Functions

### `render.render_all_posts`

```python
render_all_posts(path: str, tmpl_name: str):
```

Render each post using the associated template.

Each Markdown file will be converted to HTML; named identically, different
extension. Symbolic links will be created between date-coined folders and
corresponding title-coined ones, allowing posts to be reached according to
whichever convention. On the way fills in the `meta` object describing the post.

**Parameters:**

* `path` [`str`]: Root folder to [recursively] fetch the files to process from. Defaults to `.`.
* `tmpl_name` [`str`]: Name of the template to use. Defaults to `post.html`.

**Notes:**

This is a stateful function!

### `render.render_post_list`

```python
render_post_list(path: str, tmpl_name: str):
```

Render the list of posts using the associated template.

**Parameters:**

* `path` [`str`]: Target path the list will be rendered and outputted to. Defaults to
    `posts/index.html`.
* `tmpl_name` [`str`]: Name of the template to use. Defaults to `post.html`.

**Notes:**

This is a stateful function!

### `render.render_game_page`

```python
render_game_page(path: str, tmpl_name: str):
```

Render the little stupid game using the associated template.

**Parameters:**

* `path` [`str`]: Target path the game page will be rendered and outputted to. Defaults to
    `game.html`.
* `tmpl_name` [`str`]: Name of the template to use. Defaults to `game.html`.

**Notes:**

This is a stateful function!

### `render.render_home_page`

```python
render_home_page(path: str, tmpl_name: str):
```

Render the landing page using the associated template.

**Parameters:**

* `path` [`str`]: Target path the landing page will be rendered and outputted to. Defaults to
    `index.html`.
* `tmpl_name` [`str`]: Name of the template to use. Defaults to `home.html`.

**Notes:**

This is a stateful function!
